1. Simple harmonic motion (SHM) is defined as motion where
A. the velocity is proportional to the displacement, directed away from the centre of motion
B. the velocity is proportional to the acceleration, directed towards the centre of motion
C. the acceleration is proportional to the velocity, directed away from the centre of motion
D. the acceleration is proportional to the displacement, directed towards the centre of motion
D
2. Which of these answers gives the points of maximum velocity and acceleration of a mass spring?
A. Velocity maximum at: the top; acceleration maximum at: the centre
B. Velocity maximum at: the centre; acceleration maximum at: the top
C. Velocity maximum at: the top; acceleration maximum at: the top
D. Velocity maximum at: the centre; acceleration maximum at: the centre
B
3. A large pendulum swings from the left to the right in 2 seconds. The frequency of the pendulum is:
A. 0.25 Hz
B. 0.5 Hz
C. 2 Hz
D. 4 Hz
A
4. SHM is present in many oscillating systems. Which of the following is NOT an “SHM oscillation”?
A. A mass bouncing up and down on a spring
B. A column of water oscillating in a U shaped tube
C. The end of a ruler vibrating backwards and forwards
D. A ball bouncing up and down on the floor
D
5. Which of these can be used to polarise light?
A. Polaroid filters and reflection from plane surfaces
B. Coloured filters and reflection from plane surfaces
C. Polaroid filters and transmission through a vacuum
D. Coloured filters and transmission through a vacuum
C
6. A light ray passes through 2 polarising filters. The first filter polarises the wave in a vertical plane and the transmitted light I1 observed. The second filter is rotated and the transmitted light I2 observed. The final light intensity I2 is compared to I1 , the intensity after the first filter. What is the intensity of I2 when the angle between the two filters is 45 degrees, given that cos(45 degrees) = 1/√2?
A. I2 = (1/√2) I1
B. I2 = (1/2) I1
C. I2 = (1/4) I1
D. I2 = I1
D
7. Total internal reflection can occur when light is trapped inside glass . This is used in optical fibres. To ensure total internal reflection occurs and the light ray remains inside the glass,
A. the refractive index of the glass must be small and the angle of incidence must be small
B. the refractive index of the glass must be small and the angle of incidence must be large
C. the refractive index of the glass must be large and the angle of incidence must be small
D. the refractive index of the glass must be large and the angle of incidence must be large
B
8. The effects of diffraction are clearest in a demonstration when two quantities are similar. What are these quantities?
A. Frequency and slit width
B. Wavelength and slit width
C. Wavelength and amplitude
D. Slit width and amplitude
B
9. The intensity I of sound waves is measured at a distance x away from a loud speaker. The amplitude of the sound waves measured is A. If the amplitude is increased to 4A and then the distance increased to 2x, the measured intensity will be
A. I / 2
B. 2I
C. 4I
D. 8I
B
10. Destructive interference between the 2 rays will occur if
A. the path difference is λ
B. the path difference is λ/2
C. the slit separation is λ
D. the slit separation is λ/2
B
11. The adding together of two waves like this is correctly termed the
A. summation of waves
B. superposition of waves
C. negation of waves
D. vector addition of waves
B
12. Two waves will produce constructive interference if the phase difference is
A. 720 degrees
B. 540 degrees
C. 450 degrees
D. 180 degrees
A
13. An interference pattern will only occur between any two waves if
A. the amplitude is the same
B. the phase difference is the same
C. the angle of diffraction is the same
D. the waves are from the same source
B
14. The wavelength of an ultra-violet wave is approximately
A. 10^-4m
B. 10^-6m
C. 10^-8m
D. 10^-10m
D
15. A standing wave is typically formed by 2 waves meeting. Which of these statements about the 2 waves is correct?
A. The waves must be travelling in the same direction, and have different wavelengths
B. The waves must be travelling in opposite directions, and have different wavelengths
C. The waves must be travelling in the same direction, and have the same wavelength
D. The waves must be travelling in opposite directions, and have the same wavelength
D
